Initial working title: "Simply Complexity" or "Modeling Social Complexity for Hackers" or "Hacking Social Complexity"

The purpose of this book is to introduce the readers to the field of complex system modeling and specifically social complexity -- and get their feet wet building and understanding models of complex systems in a variety of settings, and interpreting what the models say. There will be a lot of code in the book, and a lot of exercises inviting readers to write code. Each chapter will roughly cover an area of research in complex system models, and end with a reading list and a open research problems -- an invitation for readers to make their own mark in the field. 

I would like to get a couple prominent people in the field to contribute writing and/or code to the book -- but probably not invite them as co-authors. Is there a good way to do contributed chapters?

Also -- as I'm developing the outline, I'm realizing that this may not fit into the short-form book… Shall we do a long-form or split this up?

The book will be based on an open-source Python modeling toolkit Socium which I am developing with a few collaborators. Readers will be invited to contribute to development of the toolkit as well.

Outline:

* Chapter 1: What is complexity?
introduction -- stories and pictures -- 
forest fires
avalanches
percolation
information diffusion/viral videos
banking crisis and lending/insurance networks
interdependence of economy, society, politics, biosphere

* chapter 2: complexity theory and first models
Langton -- total more then a sum of its parts

Wolfram -- emergence of complexity from simple rules of interaction
(Code: Simple cellular automata model demonstrating complex outcome)
(Code: Cellular automata and evolution of cities)

* Chapter 3: Genome of complexity
Kauffman -- origins or order 
NK Model -- genome of complexity -- (Code)
generating complexity from simple rules
Optimization on rugged landscapes (Code)
Genetic algorithm -- evolution on a rugged landscape (Code
NK-C Model -- origin of species (Code)
Applications of NK and NK-C models in the real world 
-- the field hospital problem
-- business ecology
Open research problems

* Chapter 4: Agents and Emergence of Order
What is an agent-based model? What is an agent? (Langton +)
What is a "good agent-based model" 
-- Axtell's levels 
-- validation and verification
Agent-based models vs. agent-based software design
Agents in space (grids and maps and neighborhoods) and time (scheduling)
Heat Bugs (code)
Open Research Questions

* Chapter 5: Modeling economics and economic thinking
Zero-intelligence traders (code) -- Brian Arthur - Artificial Stock Markets
Auctions and negotiations
Emergence of firms - Axtell(code)
Innovation and invention
Open research problems

Chapter 6: Modeling information diffusion
Friedkin -- information diffusion and contagion
Consumer behavior
Fads and trends
"Going viral" -- threshold models
Open research problems

7: Modeling organizations
Garbage Can model -- Simon&March (Code)
Co-evolution of networks and information -- Carley (Code)
Tasks, planning, and business models 
Evolution of Organizations -- Tsvetovat -- (Code)
Evolution of organizations in competition -- Tsvetovat/Latek (Code)
Open research problems

Chapter 8: Agent-based models in Political science and history
Emergence of culture -- Axelrod (Code)
Hierarchies and power -- Latek/Cioffi/Tsvetovat (Code)
Anasazi -- Epstein/Axtell
-- more tbd -- 
Open research problems


9: Modeling cities
Shelling -- emergence of segregation model (code)
Parker/Filatova -- urban models and ecology
Crooks -- <<TBD, Andrew Crooks will contribute>>

Chapter 10: Agent-based models in biology, ecology, physics and other fields (an overview)
<tentative -- we're already over the page limit>

Chapter 11: Open research problems and call to action

Appendix: Socium agent-based modeling toolkit API documentation
Appendix: Further reading

